etc/primer/README:

This directory contains introductory material for starlab.

The file Primer.tex is a bit outdated, written in the spring of
1993 for starlab 1.0.

As for copyrights, we have summarized our attitude in Primer.tex,
section 9, which is reproduced below.  The same statements hold for
the present version, Starlab 1.2.  Specifically, we reserve the right
of co-authorship for any publication in which scattering programs are
used (in src/dyn/scatter3 and src/dyn/scatter), in the same spirit as
discussed below under item 3.
                               Piet and Steve


\null\bigskip
\centerline{\bf 9. Ownership and Authorship}
\medskip

The primary authors of Starlab 1.0 are Piet Hut, Steve McMillan, and
Jun Makino.  Other contributors to this initial release are Fred
Rasio, whose SPH code is in {\tt src/hydro/alt/fred}, and Simon
Portegies-Zwart, whose stellar-evolution integrators may be found in
src/usr/spz.  We encourage users of Starlab to add their programs and
libraries to the package.  It is our hope that subsequent releases
will contain substantial amounts of user-written material.  They can
send their code to Piet or Steve, after they have carefully checked
that it is working and is compatible with the latest starlab version.
We will then install that code in the appropriate {\tt usr/name}
directory, from which it may eventually find its way into {\tt src}
directory.

The prospect of having several people share (and possibly augment) a
software package leads to the thorny question of ownership of
software, and, more concretely, authorship of papers written using
that software.  We want the distribution to be as free as possible,
but we must all recognize that Starlab represents a substantial
investment of programming time and effort on the part of the
contributors.  For that reason, while we do not wish to establish
hard-and-fast rules, we feel that some guidelines for the use of the
package may be helpful.

\item{1.}{If Starlab is used in a project and is found useful, but not
critical to the outcome, then both the package and the authors of the
programs used should simply be acknowledged at the end of any
resultant papers.  A similar acknowledgement in the later papers of a
long series would also be appropriate.  Examples would be the use of
Starlab for data reduction, for organizing series of experiments, or
simply for providing an embedding environment for wiring together new
pieces of code in a standardized format.}

\item{2.}{Users should try to avoid collision in publications.  For
example, the SPH code provided here will probably be used soon (i.e.
in 1993), by Fred, Steve, and possibly others to do some simulations
of small star clusters.  If you would like to use the SPH code
provided here in order to write an article about the same topic,
priority should be given to the author (in this case Fred), so that he
can publish his results well before the competing article.  In
practice, the easiest way to check for collisions is to keep Piet and/or
Steve informed of the uses to which the code is being put -- something
we'd like to know, in any case!}

\item{3.}{If Starlab, or a particular section of Starlab, is an
integral part of a piece of research, the author(s) of the code in
question should be offered co-authorship on any paper(s) resulting
from the research, even if there are no direct collisions.  If a
series of papers ensues, we would expect that the author of the
software would typically be offered co-authorship on the first one or
two. The authorship of any given Starlab program will be prominently
displayed near the start of the source file.}

\item{4.}{In case of doubt, ask Piet or Steve.}

